README.md, before:

# PdfTemplating.XslFO
This is a C#.Net solution that provides the capability to easily generate Pdf files using a templated approach; as opposed to extremely complex code based approaches most libraries provide.
It's based on the Xsl-FO standard and currently is dependent on an old but still very functional libray "Fonet" -- which is port of Apache FOP to C#.

In addition, this is a completely open-source and free solution to use (even commercially).  Many of the complex (powerful maybe, but horribly difficult to develop and maintain)
API libraries out there require licenses and are no longer possible solutions when simply due to steep licensing costs.

**I hope this helps anyone looking to dynamically generate PDF files in C# or .Net with a templating approach that is far more maintainable than other code based generation/manipulation approaches . . .**

### Project Overview:
This project illustrates the capabilities of using templating based approaches to render Xsl-FO for dynamically generating PDF documents. 
This project illustrates the use and support of two of the most common/well-known templating engines for .Net web development -- Razor Templating 
& XSLT Templating. 

The Razor & Xslt template based approaches to rendering PDF files gives you the benefits of separating the presentation from the Data model, allows 
different team members to work at the same time because the Template can be developed offline with sample Model data that can be easily loaded, and 
the code can be made very manageable with the use of Xslt include files, variables, etc. to divide your code into modular "DRY" components for re-use 
across multiple reports, etc.

In addition, the Razor & Xslt engines are extensible and can support virtually unlimited capabilities with C# based extension functions. For Razor 
templates the world of .Net is immediately available (e.g. Linq).  And, for XSLT custom extension functions can be defined in the assembly or inlinein 
the Xslt, and this project has many custom extensions already included to augment the Xslt v1.0 engine that .Net provides.

Finally, this project also provides basic a Windows Client (WinForms) application that provides a UI that can be used for developing when using the 
Xslt templating engine.

NOTE: Currently the Razor Implementation requires Microsoft.AspNet.MVC and does not yet support .Net Core. I plan to extend this as soon as I have
a real need to render Pdf file from a .Net Core web application; or a console app for that matter 
(useful info. [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38247080/using-razor-outside-of-mvc-in-net-core](here on StackOverflow).)

#### Usage is as easy as:

##### Xslt (.Net Standard 2.0):
```
//Initialize the Model to use in the templating process...
MovieSearchResults movieSearchResults = GetMovieSearchResults();

//Initialize the appropriate Renderer based on the Model to use in the Template...
string xsltFullyQualifiedPath = HttpContext.Current.Server.MapPath("~/Reports.Xslt/MoviePdfReport/MoviesReport.xsl");

IPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResponse> pdfTemplatingRenderer = new XsltPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResponse>(
    new FileInfo(xsltFullyQualifiedPath)
);

//Execute the Pdf Renderer template for the specified Model to generate the Pdf Document...
byte[] pdfBytes = pdfTemplatingRenderer.RenderPdf(movieSearchResults);
```

##### Razor View (.Net Framework and requires Microsoft.AspNet.Mvc):
```
//Initialize the Model to use in the templating process...
MovieSearchResults movieSearchResults = GetMovieSearchResults();

//Initialize the appropriate Renderer based on the Model to use in the Template...
IPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResponse> pdfTemplatingRenderer = new AspNetMvcRazorPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResults>(
    "~/Reports.Razor/MoviePdfReport/MoviesReport.cshtml",
    ControllerContext
);

//Execute the Pdf Renderer template for the specified Model to generate the Pdf Document...
byte[] pdfBytes = pdfTemplatingRenderer.RenderPdf(movieSearchResults);
```


#### Notes about the Xsl-FO Implementation(s):
This project is based on FO.NET, an open source project from CodePlex located here:
[https://archive.codeplex.com/?p=fonet](https://archive.codeplex.com/?p=fonet)

There also appears to be another version hosted here, but I have not validated the state of this code:
[https://github.com/hahmed/Fo.Net](https://github.com/hahmed/Fo.Net)

But, because the original hasn't been updated in so long, I wanted to make sure that this solution contained a stable version. 
Therefore, I've cloned the working stable version that I've used in several projects and included here in this project.  

**NOTE: I've also updated the included version to target and compile as a .Net Standard 2.0 project for greater compatibility.**

#### Caveats:
Unfortunately the FONET library that this currently uses doesn't support all features that Xsl-FO can provide, and it's not as up to date as the Apache FOP project that it ported over from.  But, in my experience it's still very capable and has worked very well for my projects for many many years.


#### TODO: Hopefully COMING SOON... 
1. Add a service oriencted implementation that uses the latest and greatest Apache FOP as a Pdf-as-a-Service via Azure Functions.
    * **I hope to spin up a full Apache FOP engine implementation in an Azure Function as a Serverless FOP Service.
        I'll updates this project to provide a new (decoupled) rendering engine implementation that uses the full Apache FOP as-a-service via the Azure function.**
2. Once I have a need to generate Pdf files with .Net Core I will create an implementation for that also.

## Testing Projects
#### XslFO.ViewerApplication project
Provides a Windows client/desktop application that can be used as a viewer to provide real-time previews while creating/developing your Xslt and/or Xsl-FO.
1. You use any text editor you like (e.g. Notepad++) to edit your Xslt.
2. Then you can point the ViewerApplication to any of the following to view preview the results:
	* Xml data + Xslt transform/report
	* Xsl-FO xml data (pre-rendered)
	* Binary Pdf File (any existing file to test the Viewer with)
	* **NOTE: The Windows Client viewer MUST be run in 32-bit mode for the Acrobat ActiveX controls to work correctly (e.g. it must be built in x86 mode).**
3. This application is completely generic and doesn't come with any pre-bundled Xslt Reports, but you can leverage the sample Xml data and MoviewReport that are located in the Web MVC project (see below).

#### XslFO.WebMvc.AspNet project
Provides a Web based client application based on ASP.Net MVC that can be used to dynamically render and stream the Pdf to the browser.  It provides an example of how elegant it can be to manage Xslt or Razor based (templated approach) reports in a web application and dynamically render Pdf's to client requests.
1. The sample report uses the OMDB Api to get results based on Movie Title Search
	* [http://www.omdbapi.com](http://www.omdbapi.com)
3. The default route for the application is **/movies/pdf** and will result in the results being rendered by the **Razor Templating engine** with a default Search using **"Star Wars"**
    * **The XSLT Templating engine is also supported (see below for explicitly testing with that engine)** 
	* In addition, you can specify any dynamic search you want by using the "title" parameter: **/pdf?title={movie title here}**, some samples are:
		1. /movies/pdf?title=star%20trek 
		2. /movies/pdf?title=braveheart
		3. /movies/pdf?title=finding%20nemo
3. The Razor Mediator reports that render the FO (Formatting Objects Xml markup) -- that is converted into Pdf format -- are located in the MVC Project at:
	* **XslFO.TestSolution/XslFO.WebMVC/Reports.Razor/...**
	* You can always explicity run the Razor Templating engine by using the explicit route:
	    1. /movies/pdf/razor?title=star%20wars
4. The XSLT reports that render the FO  (Formatting Objects Xml markup) -- that is converted into Pdf format -- are located in the MVC Project at:
	* **XslFO.TestSolution/XslFO.WebMVC/Reports.XslFO/...**
	* You can always explicity run the XSLT Templating engine by using the explicit route:
	    1. /movies/pdf/xslt?title=star%20wars


```
/*
Copyright 2012 Brandon Bernard

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

	 http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
*/
```

Commit message:

Added sample code for using a custom property in the model to simplify templating logic; fixes an issue without having to change multiple templates by normalizing values in the data model and not in the presentation.  Updated templates to handle cases when data is returned from the movie database without a valid image url.

README.md, after:

# PdfTemplating.XslFO
This is a C#.Net solution that provides the capability to easily generate Pdf files using a templated approach that provides great separation between presentation
(the template) and data (the Model); as opposed to extremely complex code based approaches most libraries provide.
It's based on the Xsl-FO standard and currently is dependent on an old but still very functional libray "Fonet" -- which is port of Apache FOP to C#.

In addition, this is a completely open-source and free solution to use (even commercially).  Many of the complex (powerful maybe, but horribly difficult to develop and maintain)
API libraries out there require licenses and are no longer possible solutions when simply due to steep licensing costs.

**I hope this helps anyone looking to dynamically generate PDF files in C# or .Net with a templating approach that is far more maintainable than other code based generation/manipulation approaches . . .**

### Project Overview:
This project illustrates the capabilities of using templating based approaches to render Xsl-FO for dynamically generating PDF documents. 
This project illustrates the use and support of two of the most common/well-known templating engines for .Net web development -- Razor Templating 
& XSLT Templating. 

The Razor & Xslt template based approaches to rendering PDF files gives you the benefits of separating the presentation from the Data model, allows 
different team members to work at the same time because the Template can be developed offline with sample Model data that can be easily loaded, and 
the code can be made very manageable with the use of Xslt include files, variables, etc. to divide your code into modular "DRY" components for re-use 
across multiple reports, etc.

In addition, the Razor & Xslt engines are extensible and can support virtually unlimited capabilities with C# based extension functions. For Razor 
templates the world of .Net is immediately available (e.g. Linq).  And, for XSLT custom extension functions can be defined in the assembly or inlinein 
the Xslt, and this project has many custom extensions already included to augment the Xslt v1.0 engine that .Net provides.

Finally, this project also provides basic a Windows Client (WinForms) application that provides a UI that can be used for developing when using the 
Xslt templating engine.

NOTE: Currently the Razor Implementation requires Microsoft.AspNet.MVC and does not yet support .Net Core. I plan to extend this as soon as I have
a real need to render Pdf file from a .Net Core web application; or a console app for that matter 
(useful info. [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/38247080/using-razor-outside-of-mvc-in-net-core](here on StackOverflow).)

#### Usage is as easy as:

##### Xslt (.Net Standard 2.0):
```
//Initialize the Model to use in the templating process...
MovieSearchResults movieSearchResults = GetMovieSearchResults();

//Initialize the appropriate Renderer based on the Model to use in the Template...
string xsltFullyQualifiedPath = HttpContext.Current.Server.MapPath("~/Reports.Xslt/MoviePdfReport/MoviesReport.xsl");

IPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResponse> pdfTemplatingRenderer = new XsltPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResponse>(
    new FileInfo(xsltFullyQualifiedPath)
);

//Execute the Pdf Renderer template for the specified Model to generate the Pdf Document...
byte[] pdfBytes = pdfTemplatingRenderer.RenderPdf(movieSearchResults);
```

##### Razor View (.Net Framework and requires Microsoft.AspNet.Mvc):
```
//Initialize the Model to use in the templating process...
MovieSearchResults movieSearchResults = GetMovieSearchResults();

//Initialize the appropriate Renderer based on the Model to use in the Template...
IPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResponse> pdfTemplatingRenderer = new AspNetMvcRazorPdfTemplatingRenderer<MovieSearchResults>(
    "~/Reports.Razor/MoviePdfReport/MoviesReport.cshtml",
    ControllerContext
);

//Execute the Pdf Renderer template for the specified Model to generate the Pdf Document...
byte[] pdfBytes = pdfTemplatingRenderer.RenderPdf(movieSearchResults);
```


#### Notes about the Xsl-FO Implementation(s):
This project is based on FO.NET, an open source project from CodePlex located here:
[https://archive.codeplex.com/?p=fonet](https://archive.codeplex.com/?p=fonet)

There also appears to be another version hosted here, but I have not validated the state of this code:
[https://github.com/hahmed/Fo.Net](https://github.com/hahmed/Fo.Net)

But, because the original hasn't been updated in so long, I wanted to make sure that this solution contained a stable version. 
Therefore, I've cloned the working stable version that I've used in several projects and included here in this project.  

**NOTE: I've also updated the included version to target and compile as a .Net Standard 2.0 project for greater compatibility.**

#### Caveats:
Unfortunately the FONET library that this currently uses doesn't support all features that Xsl-FO can provide, and it's not as up to date as the Apache FOP project that it ported over from.  But, in my experience it's still very capable and has worked very well for my projects for many many years.


#### TODO: Hopefully COMING SOON... 
1. Add a service oriencted implementation that uses the latest and greatest Apache FOP as a Pdf-as-a-Service via Azure Functions.
    * **I hope to spin up a full Apache FOP engine implementation in an Azure Function as a Serverless FOP Service.
        I'll updates this project to provide a new (decoupled) rendering engine implementation that uses the full Apache FOP as-a-service via the Azure function.**
2. Once I have a need to generate Pdf files with .Net Core I will create an implementation for that also.

## Testing Projects
#### XslFO.ViewerApplication project
Provides a Windows client/desktop application that can be used as a viewer to provide real-time previews while creating/developing your Xslt and/or Xsl-FO.
1. You use any text editor you like (e.g. Notepad++) to edit your Xslt.
2. Then you can point the ViewerApplication to any of the following to view preview the results:
	* Xml data + Xslt transform/report
	* Xsl-FO xml data (pre-rendered)
	* Binary Pdf File (any existing file to test the Viewer with)
	* **NOTE: The Windows Client viewer MUST be run in 32-bit mode for the Acrobat ActiveX controls to work correctly (e.g. it must be built in x86 mode).**
3. This application is completely generic and doesn't come with any pre-bundled Xslt Reports, but you can leverage the sample Xml data and MoviewReport that are located in the Web MVC project (see below).

#### XslFO.WebMvc.AspNet project
Provides a Web based client application based on ASP.Net MVC that can be used to dynamically render and stream the Pdf to the browser.  It provides an example of how elegant it can be to manage Xslt or Razor based (templated approach) reports in a web application and dynamically render Pdf's to client requests.
1. The sample report uses the OMDB Api to get results based on Movie Title Search
	* [http://www.omdbapi.com](http://www.omdbapi.com)
3. The default route for the application is **/movies/pdf** and will result in the results being rendered by the **Razor Templating engine** with a default Search using **"Star Wars"**
    * **The XSLT Templating engine is also supported (see below for explicitly testing with that engine)** 
	* In addition, you can specify any dynamic search you want by using the "title" parameter: **/pdf?title={movie title here}**, some samples are:
		1. /movies/pdf?title=star%20trek
        2. /movies/pdf?title=the%20matrix
		2. /movies/pdf?title=braveheart
		3. /movies/pdf?title=finding%20nemo
3. The Razor Mediator reports that render the FO (Formatting Objects Xml markup) -- that is converted into Pdf format -- are located in the MVC Project at:
	* **XslFO.TestSolution/XslFO.WebMVC/Reports.Razor/...**
	* You can always explicity run the Razor Templating engine by using the explicit route:
	    1. /movies/pdf/razor?title=star%20wars
4. The XSLT reports that render the FO  (Formatting Objects Xml markup) -- that is converted into Pdf format -- are located in the MVC Project at:
	* **XslFO.TestSolution/XslFO.WebMVC/Reports.XslFO/...**
	* You can always explicity run the XSLT Templating engine by using the explicit route:
	    1. /movies/pdf/xslt?title=star%20wars


```
/*
Copyright 2012 Brandon Bernard

   Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
   you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
   You may obtain a copy of the License at

	 http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

   Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
   distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
   WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
   limitations under the License.
*/
```
